**Sharing NFS Filesystems**
**Configuring the /etc/exports file**

The exports man page (man exports) contains details about the syntax of the /etc/exports file. In particular, you can see the options that you can use to limit access and secure each shared directory.

As root user, you can use any text editor to configure /etc/exports to modify shared directory entries or add new ones. Here's an example of an /etc/exports file:
```
/cal     *.linuxtoys.net(rw)             # Company events
/pub     *(ro,insecure,all_squash)       # Public dir
/home  maple(rw,root_squash) spruce(rw,root_squash)
```
The /cal entry represents a directory that contains information about events related to the company.
Any computer in the company's domain (*. linuxtoys.net) can mount that NFS share. Users can write files to the directory as well as read them (indicated by the rw option). 
The comment (# Company events) simply serves to remind you of what the directory contains.

The /pub entry represents a public directory. It allows any computer and user to read files from the directory (indicated by the ro option) but not to write files. The insecure option enables any computer, 
even one that doesn't use a secure NFS port, to access the directory. The all_squash option causes all users (UIDs) and groups (GIDs) to be mapped to the nobody user (UID 65534), 
giving them minimal permission to files and directories.

The /home entry enables a set of users to have the same /home directory on different computers. Suppose, for example, 
that you are sharing /home from a computer named oak. The computers named maple and spruce could each mount that directory on their own /home directories. If you gave all users the same username/UID on all machines, you could have the same /home/user directory available for each user, regardless of which computer they are logged into.
The root_squash is used to exclude the root user from another computer from having root privilege to the shared directory.

Individual host Enter one or more TCP/IP hostnames or IP addresses. If the host is in your local domain, you can simply indicate the hostname. Otherwise, use the full host.domain format. These are valid ways to indicate individual host computers:
```
 maple
 maple.handsonhistory.com
 10.0.0.11
```
IP network Allow access to all hosts from a particular network address by indicating a network number and its netmask, separated by a slash (/). Here are valid ways to designate network numbers:
 ```
 10.0.0.0/255.0.0.0 172.16.0.0/255.255.0.0
 192.168.18.0/255.255.255.0
 192.168.18.0/24
```
TCP/IP domain Using wildcards, you can include all or some host computers from a particular domain level. Here are some valid uses of the asterisk and question mark wildcards:
```
 *.handsonhistory.com
 *craft.handsonhistory.com
 ???.handsonhistory.com
```
**Access options in /etc/exports**
ro: Client can mount this exported filesystem read-only. The default is to mount the filesystem read/write. \
rw: Explicitly asks that a shared directory be shared with read/write permissions. (If the client chooses, it can still mount the directory as read-only.)

**User mapping options in /etc/exports**
In addition to options that define how permissions are handled generally, you can use options to set the permissions that specific users have to NFS shared filesystems.

root user The client's root user is mapped by default into the nobody username (UID 65534).
This prevents a client computer's root user from being able to change all files and directories in the shared filesystem. 
If you want the client's root user to have root permission on the server, use the no_root_squash option.

**Exporting the shared filesystems**
After you have added entries to your /etc/exports file, run the exportfs command to have those directories exported (made available to other computers on the network).
Reboot your computer or restart the NFS service, and the exportfs command runs automatically to export your directories.
If you want to export them immediately, run exportfs from the command line (as root).
```
# /usr/sbin/exportfs -a -r -v
exporting maple:/pub
exporting spruce:/pub
exporting maple:/home
exporting spruce:/home
exporting *:/mnt/win
```

**Using NFS Filesystems**
From a client Linux system, you can use the showmount command to see what shared directories are available from a selected computer, such as in this example:
```
$ showmount -e server.example.com
/export/myshare client.example.com
/mnt/public *
```

**Using mount options**
```
oak:/apps /oak/apps nfs noauto,ro,hard 0 0
```
