# Auditing Network Services

A Linux server has the potential to provide thousands of services. Many of them are listed in the /etc/services file. Consider the following sections from the /etc/services file:
```
$ cat /etc/services
# /etc/services:
# $Id: services,v 1.55 2013/04/14 ovasik Exp $
#
# Network services, Internet style
# IANA services version: last updated 2013-04-10
#
# Note that it is presently the policy of IANA to assign …
# Each line describes one service, and is of the form:
#
# service-name  port/protocol  [aliases …]   [# comment]
…
echo            7/tcp
echo            7/udp
discard         9/tcp           sink null
discard         9/udp           sink null
systat          11/tcp          users
systat          11/udp          users
daytime         13/tcp
daytime         13/udp
qotd            17/tcp          quote
qotd            17/udp          quote
…
chargen         19/tcp          ttytst source
chargen         19/udp          ttytst source
ftp-data        20/tcp
ftp-data        20/udp
# 21 is registered to ftp, but also used by fsp
ftp             21/tcp
…
http            80/tcp      www www-http    # WorldWideWeb HTTP
http            80/udp      www www-http    # HyperText Transfer Protocol
http            80/sctp                     # HyperText Transfer Protocol
kerberos        88/tcp      kerberos5 krb5  # Kerberos v5
kerberos        88/udp      kerberos5 krb5  # Kerberos v5
…
blp5            48129/udp           # Bloomberg locator
com-bardac-dw   48556/tcp           # com-bardac-dw
com-bardac-dw   48556/udp           # com-bardac-dw
iqobject        48619/tcp               # iqobject
iqobject        48619/udp               # iqobject
```


When you run the nmap utility, it provides a handy little report with information on the system you are scanning and the ports it sees. The ports are given a “state” status. nmap reports six possible port states:

- `open`: This is the most dangerous state an nmap scan can report for a port. An open port indicates that a server has a service handling requests on this port. Think of it as a sign on the door, “Come on in! We are here to help you.” Of course, if you are offering a public service, you want the port to be open.
- `closed`: A closed port is accessible, but there is no service waiting on the other side of this door. However, the scan status still indicates that there is a Linux server at this particular IP address.
- `filtered`: This is the best state to secure a port that you don't want anyone to access. It cannot be determined if a Linux server is actually at the scanned IP address. It is possible that a service could be listening on a particular port, but the firewall is blocking access to that port, effectively preventing any access to the service through the particular network interface.
- `unfiltered`: The nmap scan sees the port but cannot determine if the port is open or closed.
- `open|filtered`: The nmap scan sees the port but cannot determine if the port is open or filtered.
- `closed|filtered`: The nmap scan sees the port but cannot determine if the port is closed or filtered.

# Working with Firewalls

In Linux, iptables is the kernel-level firewall feature. It is most commonly used to allow or block access from outside systems to the services running on your local system. 
iptables works by allowing you to create rules that can be applied to every packet that tries to enter (INPUT), leave (OUTPUT), or cross through your system (FORWARD).

Although allowing or blocking packets trying to enter your system is the primary feature of iptables, you can also create rules for iptables that let you do the following:

- Block packets leaving your system effectively to prevent a process on your system from reaching a remote host, range of addresses, or selected services.
- Forward packets from one network interface on your system to another, effectively allowing your computer to act as a router between two networks.
- Port forward a packet intended for a selected port to be rerouted to another port on your local system, or to a remote 
  system, so that other locations can handle the request from the packet.
- Change information in a packet header (called mangling) to redirect the packet or somehow mark it for more processing.
- Allow multiple computers on a private network (such as the computers, televisions, or other devices on your home network) to communicate with the Internet over a single public IP address. (This is referred to as IP masquerading.)


Although you may tend to think of a firewall as a complete barrier, a Linux firewall is really just a filter that checks each network packet or application request coming into or out of a computer system or network.
```
NOTE
What is a network packet? A network packet is data that has been broken up into transmittable chunks. The chunks, or packets, have additional data added to them as they traverse down the OSI model. It's like putting a letter inside an envelope at each stage as it moves down the protocol stack. One of the purposes of this additional data is to ensure the packet's safe and intact arrival at its destination. The additional data is stripped off of the packet as it traverses back up the OSI model at its destination (like taking off the outer envelope and handing the letter to the layer above).
```

A firewall is either network-based or host-based. A network-based firewall is one that is protecting the entire network or subnet. For example, a network firewall would be used in your workplace, where the network should be protected by a screening router's firewall.
- **A host-based firewall is one that is running on and protecting an individual host or server**. You most likely have a firewall on your PC at home. This is a host-based firewall.
- **A firewall is either a hardware or a software firewall**. Firewalls can be located on network devices, such as routers. 
  Their filters are configured in the router's firmware. In your home, your Internet service provider (ISP) may provide a 
  router to let you gain access to the Internet. The router contains firewall firmware, and it is considered a hardware 
  firewall.\
  Firewalls can be located on a computer system as an application. The application allows filtering rules to be set that 
  filter the incoming traffic. This is an example of a software firewall. A software firewall is also called a rule-based 
  firewall.
- **A firewall is either a network-layer filter or an application-layer filter**. A firewall that examines individual 
  network packets is also called a packet filter. A network-layer firewall allows only certain packets into and out of the 
  system. It operates on the lower layers of the OSI reference model.\
  An application-layer firewall filters at the higher layers of the OSI reference model. This firewall allows only certain 
  applications access to and from the system.


Implementing firewalls
---
On a Linux system, the firewall is a host-based, network-layer, software firewall managed by the iptables utility and related kernel-level components. With iptables, you can create a series of rules for every network packet coming through your Linux server. You can fine-tune the rules to allow network traffic from one location but not from another. These rules essentially make up a network access control list for your Linux server.

The iptables utility manages the Linux firewall, called netfilter. Thus, you will often see the Linux firewall referred to as netfilter/iptables. The iptables syntax is still supported, but in the latest RHEL and Fedora releases, nftables actually provides the backend for iptables.

Understanding the iptables utility
Before you start changing the firewall rules via the iptables utility, you need to understand netfilter/iptables basics, which include the following:
```
Tables
Chains
Policies
Rules
```
Understanding these basics will help you set up and manage your Linux server firewall properly.

#### netfilter/iptables tables

There are four tables in the iptables utility, with an additional table added by SELinux. The tables offer the following functionalities:

- `filter`: The filter table is the packet filtering feature of the firewall. In this table, access control decisions are 
  made for packets traveling to, from, and through your Linux system.
- `nat`: The nat table is used for Network Address Translation (NAT). NAT table rules let you redirect where a packet goes.
- `mangle`: As you would suspect, packets are mangled (modified) according to the rules in the mangle table. Using the 
   mangle table directly is less common and typically done to change how a packet is managed.
- `raw`: The raw table is used to exempt certain network packets from something called “connection tracking.” This feature 
  is important when you are using Network Address Translation and virtualization on your Linux server.
- `security`: This table is available only on Linux distributions that have SELinux. Although typically not used directly, 
  the security table allows SELinux to allow or block a packet based on SELinux policies, adding another layer of filtering 
  on top of standard packet filter rules.


The netfilter/iptables firewall categorizes network packets into categories, called chains. There are five chains (categories) to which a network packet can be designated:

- `INPUT`: Network packets coming into the Linux server
- `FORWARD`: Network packets coming into the Linux server that are to be routed out through another network interface on 
   the server
- `OUTPUT`: Network packets coming out of the Linux server
- `PREROUTING`: Used by NAT for modifying network packets when they come into the Linux server
- `POSTROUTING`: Used by NAT for modifying network packets before they come out of the Linux server

Which netfilter/iptables table you choose to work with determines what chains are available for categorizing network packets. Table 25.1 shows what chains are available for each table.

|Table|	Chains Available|
|-----|-----------------|
filter|	INPUT, FORWARD, OUTPUT|
nat|	PREROUTING, OUTPUT, POSTROUTING|
mangle|	INPUT, FORWARD, PREROUTING, OUTPUT, POSTROUTING|
raw|	PREROUTING, OUTPUT|
security|	INPUT, FORWARD, OUTPUT|

#### netfilter/iptables rules, policies, and targets

For each network packet, a rule can be set up defining what to do with that individual packet. Network packets can be identified many ways by the netfilter/iptables firewall. These are a few of the ways:

- Source IP address
- Destination IP address
- Network protocol
- Inbound port
- Outbound port
- Network state

If no rule exists for a particular packet, then the overall policy is used. Each packet category or chain has a default policy. After a network packet matches a particular rule or falls to the default policy, then action on the packet can occur. The action taken depends upon what iptables target is set. Here are a couple of actions (targets) that can be taken:

- ACCEPT: Network packet is accepted into the server.
- REJECT: Network packet is dropped and not allowed into the server. A rejection message is sent.
- DROP: Network packet is dropped and not allowed into the server. No rejection message is sent.


**Ubuntu netfilter/iptables firewall** The firewall interface service running on this distribution is ufw. To see if the firewall service is running, enter sudo ufw status at the command line. The ufw service is an interface to the iptables utility that does not run as a service on Ubuntu. You can use ufw commands to manipulate firewall rules. However, all of the iptables utility commands are still valid for Ubuntu:
- To enable the firewall, enter sudo ufw enable at the command line.
- To disable the firewall, enter sudo ufw disable at the command line.

To see what policies and rules are currently in place for the filter (default) table, enter iptables -vnL at the command line:
```
# iptables -vnL
Chain INPUT (policy ACCEPT 0 packets, 0 bytes)…
```
```
TIP
If your Linux server is dealing with IP v6 network packets, you can use the ip6tables utility to manage your firewall for IPv6 addresses. The ip6tables utility is nearly identical to the iptables utility. For more information, enter man ip6tables at the command line.
```

#### Modifying iptables policies and rules

A few options for modifying the firewall follow:

- `-t table`
The iptables command listed along with this switch is applied to the table. By default, the filter table is used. Example:
```
# iptables -t filter -P OUTPUT DROP
```

- `-P chain target`
Sets the overall policy for a particular chain. The rules in the chain are checked for matches. If no match occurs, then the chain's listed target is used. Example:
```
# iptables -P INPUT ACCEPT
```

- `-A chain`
Sets a rule called an “appended rule,” which is an exception to the overall policy for the chain designated. Example:
```
# iptables -A OUTPUT -d 10.140.67.25 -j REJECT
```

- `-I rule# chain`
Inserts an appended rule into a specific location, designated by the rule#, in the appended rule list for the chain designated. Example:
```
# iptables -I 5 INPUT -s 10.140.67.23 -j DROP
```

- `-D chain rule#`
Deletes a particular rule, designated by the rule#, from the chain designated. Example:
```
# iptables -D INPUT 5
```

- `-j target`
If the criteria in the rule are met, the firewall should jump to this designated target for processing. Example:
```
# iptables -A INPUT -s 10.140.67.25 -j DROP
```

- `-d IP address`
Assigns the rule listed to apply to the designated destination IP address. Example:
```
# iptables -A OUTPUT -d 10.140.67.25 -j REJECT
```

- `-s IP address`
Assigns the rule listed to apply to the designated source IP address. Example:
```
# iptables -A INPUT -s 10.140.67.24 -j ACCEPT
```

- `-p protocol`
Assigns the rule listed to apply to the protocol designated. For example, here incoming ping (icmp) requests are dropped:
```
# iptables -A INPUT -p icmp -j DROP
```

- `--dport port#`
Assigns the rule listed to apply to certain protocol packets coming into the designated port#. Example:
```
# iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --dport 22 -j DROP
```

- `--sport port#`
Assigns the rule listed to apply to certain protocol packets going out of the designated port#. Example:
```
# iptables -A OUTPUT -p tcp --sport 22 -j ACCEPT
```

- `-m state --state network_state`
Assigns the rule listed to apply to the designated network state(s). Example:
```
# iptables -A INPUT -m state --state RELATED,ESTABLISHED -j ACCEPT
```
```
TIP
For policies, you cannot set the target to REJECT. It fails, and you receive the message “iptables: Bad policy name.” Use DROP as your policy instead.
```

#### Saving an iptables configuration
You can save the current set of firewall filter rules using the iptables-save command.
```
# iptables -vnL
Chain INPUT (policy ACCEPT 8 packets, 560 bytes)
 pkts bytes target prot opt in  out source        destination
    0     0 DROP   tcp  --  *   *   10.140.67.22  0.0.0.0/0   tcp dpt:22
    0     0 DROP   tcp  --  *   *   0.0.0.0/0     0.0.0.0/0   tcp dpt:33
    0     0 DROP   icmp --  *   *   0.0.0.0/0     0.0.0.0/0
…
 
# iptables-save> /tmp/myiptables
```

To restore those rules later, you can start by flushing the current rules (iptables -F) and restoring them (iptables-restore).
```
# iptables -F
# iptables -vnL
Chain INPUT (policy ACCEPT 8 packets, 560 bytes)
 pkts bytes target prot opt in out source       destination
    0     0 DROP   tcp  --  *  *   0.0.0.0/0    0.0.0.0/0  tcp dpt:33
    0     0 DROP   icmp --  *  *   0.0.0.0/0    0.0.0.0/0
…
```

A flush of the rules does not affect the iptables configuration file. To restore the firewall to its original condition, use the iptables-restore command. In the example that follows, the iptables configuration file is redirected into the restore command and the original DROP rule for 10.140.67.22 is restored.
```
# iptables-restore < /tmp/myiptables
# iptables -vnL
Chain INPUT (policy ACCEPT 16 packets, 1120 bytes)
 pkts bytes target prot opt in out source       destination
    0     0 DROP   tcp  --  *  *   10.140.67.22 0.0.0.0/0      tcp dpt:22
    0     0 DROP   tcp  --  *  *   0.0.0.0/0    0.0.0.0/0      tcp dpt:33
    0     0 DROP   icmp --  *  *   0.0.0.0/0    0.0.0.0/0
```
