# Understanding Linux Containers
#### Namespaces
Linux support for namespaces is what allows containers to be contained. With namespaces,
the Linux kernel can associate one or more processes with a set of resources. Normal processes, not those run in a container, all use the same host namespaces.
By default, processes in a container only see the container's namespaces and not those of the host. Namespaces include the following:

- **Process table** A container has its own set of process IDs and, by default, can only see processes running inside the container. While PID 1 on the host is the init process (systemd), in a container PID 1 is the first process run inside the container.
- **Network interfaces** By default, a container has a single network interface (eth0) and is assigned an IP address when the container runs. By default, a service run inside a container (such as a web server listening on ports 80 and 443) is not exposed outside of the host system. The upside of this is that you could have hundreds of web servers running on the same host without conflict. The downside is that you need to manage how those ports are exposed outside of the host.
- **Mount table** By default, a container can't see the host's root file system, or any other mounted file system listed in the host's mount table. The container brings its own filesystem, consisting of the application and any dependencies it needs to run. Files or directories needed from the host can be selectively bind-mounted inside the container.
- **User IDs** Although containerized processes run as some UID within the host's namespace, another set of UIDs is nested within the container. This can, for example, let a process run as root within a container but not have any special privileges to the host system.
- **UTS** A UTS namespace allows a containerized process to have a different host and domain name from the host.
- **Control group (cgroup)** In some Linux systems (such as Fedora and RHEL), a containerized process runs within a selected control group and cannot see the other cgroups available on the host system. Likewise, it cannot see the identity of its own cgroup.
- **Interprocess communications (IPC)** A containerized process cannot see the IPC namespace from the host.
