Using configuration files
---

Traditionally, Linux servers have been configured by editing plain-text files in the /etc directory (or subdirectories). Often, there is a primary configuration file; 
sometimes, there is a related configuration directory in which files ending in .conf can be pulled into the main configuration file.

The httpd package (Apache web server) is an example of a server package that has a primary configuration file and a directory where other configuration files can be dropped in and be included with the service. 
The main configuration file in Fedora and RHEL is /etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf. The configuration directory is /etc/httpd/conf.d/.
```
instead of using vi to edit configuration files, use vim. Using the vim command can help you catch configuration file errors as you are editing.

The vim command knows about the formats of many configuration files (passwd, httpd.conf, fstab, and others).
 If you make a mistake and type an invalid term or option in one of those files, or break the format somehow, the color of the text changes. For example, in /etc/fstab,
if you change the option defaults to default, the word's color changes.
```

You can also use the Pluggable Authentication Module (PAM) facility to adjust the number of times that someone can have failed login attempts before blocking access to that person. 
PAM also includes other features for locking down authentication to your Linux server. 

SELinux
---
A major function of SELinux is to protect the contents of your Linux system from the processes running on the system. In other words, SELinux makes sure a web server, FTP server, Samba server, or DNS server can access only a restricted set of files on the system (as defined by file contexts) and allows only a restricted set of features (as defined by Booleans and limited port access).

Using ssh for remote login
---

If this is the very first time that you have logged in to that remote system using the ssh command, the system asks you to confirm that you want to connect. Type yes, and press Enter. When prompted, enter the user's password.

When you type yes to continue, you accept the remote host's public key. At that point, the remote host's public key is downloaded to the client in the client's ~/.ssh/known_hosts file. Now data exchanged between these two systems can be encrypted and decrypted using RSA asymmetric encryption (see Chapter 23, “Understanding Advanced Linux Security”). After you are logged in to the remote system, you can begin typing shell commands. The connection functions like a normal login. The only difference is that the data is encrypted as it travels over the network.


Besides logging into a remote shell, the ssh command can be used to execute a command on the remote system and have the output returned to the local system. Here is an example:
```
$ ssh johndoe@10.140.67.23 hostname
johndoe@10.140.67.23's password: **********
host01.example.com
In the example just shown, the hostname command runs as the user johndoe on the Linux system located at IP address 10.140.67.23. The output of the command is the name of the remote host (in this case, host01.example.com), which appears on the local screen.
```
If you run a remote execution command with ssh that includes options or arguments, be sure to surround the whole remote command line in quotes. Keep in mind that if you refer to files or directories in your remote commands, relative paths are interpreted in relation to the user's home directory, as shown here:
```
$ ssh johndoe@10.140.67.23 "cat myfile"
johndoe@10.140.67.23's password: **********
Contents of the myfile file located in johndoe's home directory.
```
Copying files between systems with scp and rsync
---
The following is an example of using the scp command to copy a file called memo from the home directory of the user chris to the /tmp directory on a remote computer as the user johndoe:
```
$ scp /home/chris/memo johndoe@10.140.67.23:/tmp
johndoe@10.140.67.23's password: ***************
memo     100%|****************|  153    0:00
```

You can do recursive copies with scp using the -r option. Instead of a file, pass a directory name to the scp command and all files and directories below that point in the filesystem are copied to the other system.
```
$ scp johndoe@10.140.67.23:/usr/share/man/man1/ /tmp/
johndoe@10.140.67.23's password: ***************
volname.1.gz             100%   543  0.5KB/s  00:00
mtools.1.gz              100%  6788  6.6KB/s  00:00
roqet.1.gz               100%  2496  2.4KB/s  00:00
```

The output of those commands tells you a few things about how scp works:

`. Attributes lost Permissions or date/time stamp attributes were not retained when the files were copied. If you were using scp as a backup tool, you would probably want to keep permissions and time stamps on the files if you needed to restore the files later.
2. Symbolic links lost The batch.1.gz file is actually a symbolic link to the at.1.gz file. Instead of copying the link, scp follows the link and actually copies the file. Again, if you were to restore this directory, batch.1.gz would be replaced by the actual at.1.gz file instead of a link to it.
3. Copy repeated unnecessarily If you watched the second scp output, you would notice that all files were copied again, even though the exact files being copied were already on the target. The updated modification date confirms this. By contrast, the rsync command can determine that a file has already been copied and not copy the file again.
```
$ rm -rf /tmp/man1/
$ rsync -avl johndoe@10.140.67.23:/usr/share/man/man1/ /tmp/
johndoe@10.140.67.23's password: ***************
sending incremental file list
man1/
man1/HEAD.1.gz
man1/Mail.1.gz -> mailx.1.gz
…
$ rsync -avl johndoe@10.140.67.23:/usr/share/man/man1/ /tmp/
johndoe@10.140.67.23's password: ***************
sending incremental file list
sent 42362 bytes received 13 bytes 9416.67 bytes/sec
total size is 7322223 speedup is 172.80
$ ls -l /usr/share/man/man1/batch* /tmp/man1/batch*
lrwxrwxrwx.1 johndoe johndoe 7 Feb 14 17:49 /tmp/man1/batch.1.gz
     -> at.1.gz
lrwxrwxrwx.1 root root 7 Feb 14 17:49 /usr/share/man/man1/batch.1.gz
     -> at.1.gz
```
After removing the /tmp/man1 directory, you run an rsync command to copy all of the files to the /tmp/man1 directory, using -a (recursive archive), -v (verbose), and -l (copy symbolic links). Then run the command immediately again and notice that nothing is copied. The rsync command knows that all of the files are there already, so it doesn't copy them again. This can be a tremendous savings of network bandwidth for directories with gigabytes of files where only a few megabytes change.

Also notice from the output of ls -l that the symbolic links have been preserved on the batch.1.gz file and so has the date/time stamp on the file. If you need to restore those files later, you can put them back exactly as they were.

if you want the remote and local directories to be mirrored, you would have to add the --delete option. The result is that the services file is deleted on the local system, making the remote and local directory structures in sync.
```
$ rsync -avl /usr/share/man/man1 localhost:/tmp
johndoe@10.140.67.23's password: ***************
sending incremental file list
man1/
$ rsync -avl --delete johndoe@10.140.67.23:/usr/share/man/man1 /tmp
johndoe@10.140.67.23's password: ***************
sending incremental file list
deleting man1/services
```

Interactive copying with sftp
---

sftp has nothing to do with the FTP protocol and doesn't use FTP servers. It simply uses an FTP style of interaction between a client and a sshd server.
```
$ sftp johndoe@jd.example.com
Connecting to jd.example.com
johndoe@jd.example.com's password: ***************
sftp>
```
At this point, you can begin an interactive FTP session. You can use get and put commands on files as you would with any FTP client, but with the comfort of knowing that you are working on an encrypted and secure connection. Because the FTP protocol passes usernames, passwords, and data in clear text, using sftp over SSH, if possible, is a much better alternative for allowing your users to copy files interactively from the system.

Using key-based (passwordless) authentication
---
If you are using SSH tools to connect to the same systems throughout the day, you might find it inconvenient to be entering your password over and over again. Instead of using password-based authentication, SSH allows you to set up key-based authentication to use instead. Here's how it works:
1. You create a public key and a private key.
2. You guard the private key but copy the public key across to the user account on the remote host to which you want to do key-based authentication.
3. With your key copied to the proper location, you use any SSH tools to connect to the user account on the remote host, but instead of asking you for a password, the remote SSH service compares the public key and the private key and allows you access if the two keys match.

```
 $ ssh-copy-id -i ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub johndoe@10.140.67.23
johndoe@10.140.67.23's password: 
***************
```

Displaying system space with df
---

You can display the space available in your filesystems using the df command. To see the amount of space available on all of the mounted filesystems on your Linux computer, type df with no options:
```
$ df
Filesystem  1k-blocks     Used  Available  Use%   Mounted on
/dev/sda3    30645460  2958356   26130408  11%    /
/dev/sda2       46668     8340      35919  19%    /boot
```

Checking disk usage with du
---
```
$ du -h /home/jake
114k   /home/jake/httpd/stuff
234k   /home/jake/httpd
137k   /home/jake/uucp/data
701k   /home/jake/uucp
1.0M   /home/jake
```
The output shows the disk space used in each directory under the home directory of the user named jake (/home/jake). Disk space consumed is shown in kilobytes (k) and megabytes (M). The total space consumed by /home/jake is shown on the last line. Add the –s option to see total disk space used for a directory and its subdirectories.
