Systemd: The latest versions of Fedora and RHEL use the systemd init system. 
It is the most complex of the init systems, but it also offers much more flexibility. 
Systemd offers not only features for starting and working with services,
but also lets you manage sockets, devices, mount points, swap areas, and other unit types.

Understanding the Initialization Daemon (init or systemd)
---

In order to understand service management, you need to understand the initialization daemon.
The initialization daemon can be thought of as the “mother of all processes.”
This daemon is the first process to be started by the kernel on the Linux server.
For Linux distributions that use SysVinit, the init daemon is literally named init.
For systemd, the init daemon is named systemd.

The Linux kernel has a process ID (PID) of 0. 
Thus, the initialization process (init or systemd) daemon has a parent process ID (PPID) of 0, and a PID of 1.
Once started, init is responsible for spawning (launching) processes configured to be started at the server's boot time,
such as the login shell (getty or mingetty process). 
It is also responsible for managing services.

 Running ps -e can immediately tell you if yours is a systemd system:
```
# ps -e | head
 PID TTY       TIME CMD
   1 ?      00:04:36 systemd
   2 ?      00:00:03 kthreadd
   3 ?      00:00:15 ksoftirqd/0
```
If PID 1 is the init daemon for your system

Learning systemd basics
---

Although the main job of systemd is to start and stop services, 
it can manage other types of things referred to as units. A unit is a group consisting of a name, 
type, and configuration file, and it is focused on a particular service or action. There are 12 systemd unit types:
```
automount
device
mount
path
service
snapshot
socket
target
timer
swap
slice
scope
```

The two primary systemd units with which you need to be concerned for dealing with services 
are service units and target units. 
A service unit is for managing daemons on your Linux server.
A target unit is simply a group of other units.

```
# systemctl list-unit-files --type=service
UNIT FILE                                  STATE
…
cups.service                               enabled
…
dbus.service                               static
…
NetworkManager.service                     enabled
…
poweroff.service                           static
…
sshd.service                               enabled
sssd.service                               disabled
…
276 unit files listed.
```
```
# systemctl list-unit-files --type=target
UNIT FILE                  STATE
anaconda.target            static
basic.target               static
bluetooth.target           static
cryptsetup.target          static
ctrl-alt-del.target        disabled
default.target             enabled
…
shutdown.target            static
sigpwr.target              static
smartcard.target           static
sockets.target             static
sound.target               static
swap.target                static
sysinit.target             static
syslog.target              static
time-sync.target           static
umount.target              static
43 unit files listed.
```

Notice that both of the configuration units’ file examples display units with a status of static, enabled, or disabled. 
The enabled status means that the unit is currently enabled. 
The disabled status means that the unit is currently disabled. The next status, static, 
is slightly confusing. It stands for “statically enabled,” 
and it means that the unit is enabled by default and cannot be disabled, even by root.


The service unit configuration files contain lots of information, such as what other services must be started, 
when this service can be started, which environmental file to use, and so on. 
The following example shows the sshd daemon's unit configuration file:
```
# cat /lib/systemd/system/sshd.service
[Unit]
Description=OpenSSH server daemon
Documentation=man:sshd(8) man:sshd_config(5)
After=network.target sshd-keygen.target
 
[Service]
Type=notify
EnvironmentFile=-/etc/crypto-policies/back-ends/opensshserver.config
EnvironmentFile=-/etc/sysconfig/sshd
ExecStart=/usr/sbin/sshd -D $OPTIONS $CRYPTO_POLICY
ExecReload=/bin/kill -HUP $MAINPID
KillMode=process
Restart=on-failure
RestartSec=42s
 
[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
 
[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

This basic service unit configuration file has the following options:

1. **Description:** A free-form description (comment line) of the service.
2. **Documentation:** Lists man pages for the sshd daemon and configuration file.
3. **After:** Configures ordering. In other words, it lists which units should be activated before this service is started.
4. **Environment File:** The service's configuration files.
5. **ExecStart:** The command used to start this service.
6. **ExecReload:** The command used to reload this service.
7. **WantedBy:** The target unit to which this service belongs.


You can view the various units that a target unit will activate by using the following command:
```
# systemctl show --property "Wants" multi-user.target
Wants=irqbalance.service firewalld.service plymouth-quit.service
systemd-update-utmp-runlevel.service systemd-ask-password-wall.path…
(END)
```

A target unit has both Wants and requirements, called Requires. A Wants means that all of the units listed are triggered to activate (start). If they fail or cannot be started, no problem—the target unit continues on its merry way. The preceding example is a display of Wants only.

A Requires is much more stringent than a Wants and potentially catastrophic. A Requires means that all of the units listed are triggered to activate (start). If they fail or cannot be started, the entire unit (group of units) is deactivated.

```
# cat /lib/systemd/system/multi-user.target
# This file is part of systemd.
#
…
 
[Unit]
Description=Multi-User
Documentation=man:systemd.special(7)
Requires=basic.target
Conflicts=rescue.service rescue.target
After=basic.target rescue.service rescue.target
AllowIsolate=yes
```

This basic target unit configuration file has the following options:

1. **Description:** This is just a free-form description of the target.
2. **Documentation:** Lists the appropriate systemd man page.
3. **Requires:** If this multi-user.target gets activated, the listed target unit is also activated. If the listed target unit is deactivated or fails, then multi-user.target is deactivated. If there are no After and Before options, then both multi-user.target and the listed target unit activate simultaneously.
4. **Conflicts:** This setting avoids conflicts in services. Starting multi-user.target stops the listed targets and services, and vice versa.
5. **After:** This setting configures ordering. In other words, it determines which units should be activated before starting this service.
7. **AllowIsolate:** This option is a Boolean setting of yes or no. If this option is set to yes, then this target unit, multi-user.target, is activated along with its dependencies and all others are deactivated.

If you need more help understanding the systemd daemon, 
you can enter **man -k systemd** at the command line to get a listing of the various systemd utilities’ documentation 
in the man pages.

Checking the Status of Services
---
