Understanding the httpd package
---
```
# rpm -qpc httpd-*rpm
/etc/httpd/conf.d/autoindex.conf
/etc/httpd/conf.d/userdir.conf
/etc/httpd/conf.d/welcome.conf
/etc/httpd/conf.modules.d/00-base.conf
/etc/httpd/conf.modules.d/00-dav.conf
…
/etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf
/etc/httpd/conf/magic
/etc/logrotate.d/httpd
/etc/sysconfig/htcacheclean
```
The main configuration file is `/etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf` for Apache. 
The `welcome.conf` file defines the default home page for your website, until you add some content. 
The `magic` file defines rules that the server can use to figure out a file's type when the server tries to open it.

The `/etc/logrotate.d/httpd` file defines how log files produced by Apache are rotated. 
The `/usr/lib/tmpfiles.d/httpd.conf` file defines a directory that contains temporary runtime files (no need to change that file).

Securing Apache
---

To verify which ports are being used by the httpd server, use the netstat command:
```
# netstat -tupln | grep httpd
tcp6   0      0 :::80           :::*                 LISTEN      29169/httpd
tcp6   0      0 :::443          :::*                 LISTEN      29169/httpd
```

Understanding the Apache configuration files
---

In Fedora and RHEL, the basic Apache server's primary configuration file is in `/etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf`. 
Besides this file, any file ending in .conf in the `/etc/httpd/conf.d` directory is also used for Apache configuration (based on an Include line in the httpd.conf file). 
In Ubuntu, the Apache configuration is stored in text files read by the Apache server, beginning with `/etc/apache2/apache2.conf`.
Configuration is read from start to finish, with most directives being processed in the order in which they are read.


Locations are configured in the form of a start tag containing the location type and a resource location, followed by the configuration options for that location, 
and finishing with an end tag. This form is often called a configuration block, and it looks very similar to HTML code.
A special type of configuration block, known as a location block, is used to limit the scope of directives to specific files or directories. These blocks take the following form:
```
<locationtag specifier>
(options specific to objects matching the specifier go within this block)
</locationtag>
```
The location tags that you generally use and encounter are `Directory`, `Files`, and `Location`, which limit the scope of the directives to specific directories, files, or locations, respectively.

- `Directory` tags are used to specify a path based on the location on the filesystem. For instance, `<Directory />` refers to the root directory on the computer. Directories inherit settings from directories above them, with the most specific `Directory` block overriding less‐specific ones, regardless of the order in which they appear in the configuration files.
- `Files` tags are used to specify files by name. `Files` tags can be contained within a Directory block to limit them to files under that directory. Settings within a `Files` block override the ones in Directory blocks.
- `Location` tags are used to specify the URI used to access a file or directory. This is different from `Directory` in that it relates to the address contained within the request
- and not to the real location of the file on the drive. `Location` tags are processed last and override the settings in `Directory` and `Files` blocks.


Three directives commonly found in location blocks and access control files are `DirectoryIndex`, `Options`, and `ErrorDocument`:

- `DirectoryIndex` tells Apache which file to load when the URI contains a directory but not a filename. This directive doesn't work in `Files` blocks.
- `Options` is used to adjust how Apache handles files within a directory. The `ExecCGI` option tells Apache that files in that directory can be run as CGI scripts, and the `Includes` option tells Apache that server‐side includes (SSIs) are permitted. Another common option is the Indexes option, which tells Apache to generate a list of files if one of the filenames found in the `DirectoryIndex` setting is missing. An absolute list of options can be specified, or the list of options can be modified by adding + or ‐ in front of an option name. See http://httpd.apache.org/docs/mod/core.html#options for more information.
- `ErrorDocument` directives can be used to specify a file containing messages to send to web clients when a particular error occurs. The location of the file is relative to the /var/www directory. The directive must specify an error code and the full URI for the error document. Possible error codes include 403 (access denied), 404 (file not found), and 500 (server internal error). You can find more information about the ErrorDocument directive at http://httpd.apache.org/docs/mod/core.html#errordocument. As an example, when a client requests a URL from the server that is not found, the following ErrorDocument line causes the 404 error code to send the client an error message that is listed in the /var/www/error/HTTP_NOT_FOUND.html.var file.
```
 ErrorDocument 404 /error/HTTP_NOT_FOUND.html.var
```

Understanding default settings
---

The following settings show locations where the httpd server is getting and putting content by default:
```
ServerRoot "/etc/httpd"
Include conf.d/*.conf
ErrorLog logs/error_log
CustomLog "logs/access_log" combined
DocumentRoot "/var/www/html"
ScriptAlias /cgi-bin/ "/var/www/cgi-bin/"
```
The `ServerRoot` directive identifies `/etc/httpd` as the location where configuration files are stored.
At the point in the file where the Include line appears, any files ending in `.conf` from the `/etc/httpd/conf.d` directory are included in the httpd.conf file.

As errors are encountered and content is served, messages about those activities are placed in files indicated by the ErrorLog and CustomLog entries. 
From the entries shown here, those logs are stored in the /etc/httpd/logs/error_log and /etc/httpd/logs/access_log directories, respectively. 
Those logs are also hard linked to the /var/log/httpd directory, so you can access the same file from there as well.


The `DocumentRoot` and `ScriptAlias` directives determine where content that is served by your httpd server is stored.
Traditionally, you would place an index.html file in the `DocumentRoot` directory (/var/www/html, by default) as the home page and add other content as needed.
The ScriptAlias directive tells the httpd daemon that any scripts requested from the cgi‐bin directory should be found in the `/var/www/cgi‐bin directory`. 
For example, a client could access a script located in `/var/www/cgi‐bin/script.cgi` by entering a URL such as `http://example.com/cgi-bin/script.cgi`.

In addition to file locations, you can find other information in the httpd.conf file. Here are some examples:
```
Listen 80
User apache
Group apache
ServerAdmin root@localhost
DirectoryIndex index.html index.php
AccessFileName .htaccess
```

The `Listen 80` directive tells httpd to listen for incoming requests on port 80 (the default port for the HTTP web server protocol). 
By default, it listens on all network interfaces, although you could restrict it to selected interfaces by IP address (for example, Listen 192.168.0.1:80).

The User and Group directives tell httpd to run as apache for both the user and group. 
The value of ServerAdmin (root@localhost, by default) is published on some web pages to tell users where to email if they have problems with the server.

The `DirectoryIndex` lists files that httpd will serve if a directory is requested. For example, if a web browser requested http://host/whatever/, httpd would see whether /var/www/html/whatever/index.html existed and serve it if so. If it didn't exist, in this example, httpd would look for index.php. If that file couldn't be found, the contents of the directory would be displayed. An AccessFileName directive can be added to tell httpd to use the contents of the .htaccess file if it exists in a directory to read in settings that apply to access to that directory. For example, the file could be used to require password protection for the directory or to indicate that the contents of the directory should be displayed in certain ways. For this file to work, however, a Directory container (described next) would have to have AllowOverride opened. (By default, the AllowOverride None setting prevents the .htaccess file from being used for any directives.)

The following Directory containers define behavior when the root directory (/), /var/www, and /var/www/html directories are accessed:
```
<Directory/>
    AllowOverride none
    Require all denied
</Directory>
<Directory "/var/www">
    AllowOverride None
    # Allow open access:
    Require all granted
</Directory>
<Directory "/var/www/html">
    Options Indexes FollowSymLinks
    AllowOverride None
    Require all granted
</Directory>
```
The first Directory container (/) indicates that if httpd tries to access any files in the Linux filesystem, access is denied. The AllowOverride none directive prevents .htaccess files from overriding settings for that directory. Those settings apply to any subdirectories that are not defined in other Directory containers.

Content access is relaxed within the /var/www directory. Access is granted to content added under that directory, but overriding settings is not allowed.

The /var/www/html Directory container follows symbolic links and does not allow overrides. With Require all granted set, httpd doesn't prevent any access to the server.


Adding a virtual host to Apache
---

Virtual hosts are really just a way to have the content for multiple domain names available from the same Apache server.
Instead of needing to have one physical system to serve content for each domain, you can serve content for multiple domains from the same operating system.
```
NOTE
After you enable your first VirtualHost, your default DocumentRoot (/var/www/html) is no longer used if someone accesses the server by IP address or some name that is not set in a VirtualHost container. Instead, the first VirtualHost container is used as the default location for the server.
```

 ```
<VirtualHost *:80>
    ServerAdmin     webmaster@example.org
    ServerName      www.example.org
    ServerAlias     web.example.org
    DocumentRoot    /var/www/html/example.org/
DirectoryIndex  index.php index.html index.htm
</VirtualHost>
```

This example includes the following settings:

- The *:80 specification in the VirtualHost block indicates to what address and port this virtual host applies. With multiple IP addresses associated with your Linux system, the * can be replaced by a specific IP address. The port is optional for VirtualHost specifications but should always be used to prevent interference with SSL virtual hosts (which use port 443 by default).
- The ServerName and ServerAlias lines tell Apache which names this virtual host should be recognized as, so replace them with names appropriate to your site. You can leave out the ServerAlias line if you do not have any alternate names for the server, and you can specify more than one name per ServerAlias line or have multiple ServerAlias lines if you have several alternate names.
- The DocumentRoot specifies where the web documents (content served for this site) are stored. Although shown as a subdirectory that you create under the default DocumentRoot (/var/www/html), often sites are attached to the home directories of specific users (such as /home/chris/public_html) so that each site can be managed by a different user.

use apachectl to check the configuration, and then do a graceful restart:
```
# apachectl configtest
Syntax OK

# apachectl graceful
```


Allowing users to publish their own web content
---

In situations where you do not have the ability to set up a virtual host for every user for whom you want to provide web space, you can easily make use of the mod_userdir module in Apache. With this module enabled (which it is not by default), the public_html directory under every user's home directory is available to the web at http://servername/~username/.

For example, a user named wtucker on www.example.org stores web content in /home/wtucker/public_html. That content would be available from http://www.example.org/~wtucker.

Checking for configuration errors
---

When encountering a problem, first use the apachectl program with the configtest parameter to test the configuration. In fact, it's a good idea to develop the habit of running this every time you make a configuration change:
```
# apachectl configtest
Syntax OK
# apachectl graceful
/usr/sbin/apachectl graceful: httpd gracefully restarted****
```
