Starting the vsftpd Service
---

No configuration is required to launch the vsftpd service if you just want to use the default settings. If you start vsftpd as it is delivered with Fedora, the following is what you get:

- The vsftpd service starts the vsftpd daemon, which runs in the background.
- The standard port on which the vsftpd daemon listens is TCP port 21. By default, data is transferred to the user, after the connection is made, on TCP port 20. TCP port 21 must be open in the firewall to allow new connections to access the service. Both IPv4 and IPv6 connections are available by default. This procedure changes to the TCP IPv4 service. (See the section “Securing Your FTP Server” later in this chapter for details on opening ports, enabling connection tracking needed for passive FTP, and setting other firewall rules related to FTP.)
- The vsftpd daemon reads vsftpd.conf to determine what features the service allows.
- Linux user accounts (excluding administrative users) can access the FTP server. The anonymous user account (no password required) can be enabled. (If SELinux is in enforcing mode, you need to set a Boolean to allow regular users to log in to the FTP server. See the section “Securing Your FTP Server” for details.)
- The anonymous user has access only to the /var/ftp directory and its subdirectories. A regular user starts with their home directory as the current directory but can access any directory to which the user would be able to gain access via a regular login or SSH session. Lists of users in the /etc/vsftpd/user_list and /etc/vsftpd/ftpusers files define some administrative and special users who do not have access to the FTP server (root, bin, daemon, and others).
- By default, the anonymous user can download files from the server but not upload them. A regular user can upload or download files, based on regular Linux permissions.
- Log messages detailing file uploads or downloads are written in the /var/log/xferlogs file. Those log messages are stored in a standard xferlog format.

Configuring Your FTP Server
---
The vsftpd server comes with all local Linux users (those listed in the /etc/passwd file) configured to access the server and the anonymous user prevented. This is based on the following vsftpd.conf settings:
```
anonymous_enable=NO
local_enable=YES
```

With the user account set with /sbin/nologin as the default shell, any attempts to log in from a console or via ssh as the user bill are denied. 
However, as long as bill has a password and local account access to the FTP server is enabled, bill should be able to log in to the FTP server via an FTP client.

The setting userlist_enable=YES in vsftpd.conf says to deny access to the FTP server to all accounts listed in the /etc/vsftpd/user_list file.
That list includes administrative users root, bin, daemon, adm, lp, and others. You can add to that list other users to whom you would like to deny access.

If you change userlist_enable to NO, the user_list file becomes a list of only those users who do have access to the server. In other words, setting userlist_enable=NO, 
removing all usernames from the user_list file, and adding the usernames chris, joe, and mary to that file cause the server to allow only those three users to log in to the server.

To allow anonymous uploads with vsftpd, you must have the first option in the following code example, 
and you may want the second line of code as well (both can be enabled by uncommenting them from the vsftpd.conf file). The first allows anonymous users to upload files; the second allows them to create directories:
```
anon_upload_enable=YES
anon_mkdir_write_enable=YES
```
```
/usr/share/doc/vsftpd/EXAMPLE/INTERNET_SITE/vsftpd.conf
```
The following paragraphs describe the contents of that vsftpd.conf. Settings in the first section set the access rights for the server:
```
# Access rights
anonymous_enable=YES
local_enable=NO
write_enable=NO
anon_upload_enable=NO
anon_mkdir_write_enable=NO
anon_other_write_enable=NO

Turning on anonymous_enable (YES)and turning off local_enable (NO)ensures that no one can log in to the FTP server using a regular Linux user account. Everyone must come in through the anonymous account. No one can upload files (write_enable=NO). Then, the anonymous user cannot upload files (anon_upload_enable=NO), create directories (anon_mkdir_write_enable=NO), or otherwise write to the server (anon_other_write_enable=NO). Here are the Security settings:
 ```
# Security
anon_world_readable_only=YES
connect_from_port_20=YES
hide_ids=YES
pasv_min_port=50000
pasv_max_port=60000
```

Because the vsftpd daemon can read files assigned to the ftp user and group, setting anon_world_readable_only=YES ensures that anonymous users can see files where the read permission bit is turned on for other (‐‐‐‐‐‐r‐‐), but not write files. The connect_from_port_20=YES setting gives the vsftpd daemon slightly more permission to send data the way a client might request by allowing PORT‐style data communications.

Using hide_ids=YES hides the real permissions set on files, so to the user accessing the FTP site, everything appears to be owned by the ftp user. The two pasv settings restrict the range of ports that can be used with passive FTP (where the server picks a higher number port on which to send data) to between 50000 and 60000.



Using FTP Clients to Connect to Your Server
---
To test your FTP server from the command line, you can use the lftp command. To install the lftp command in Fedora or RHEL, enter the following from the command line:
```
# yum install lftp
```

To have the commands you run interpreted by the client system, you can simply put an exclamation mark (!) in front of a command. For example,
running !pwd shows that the current directory on the system that initiated the lftp is /root. This is good to know because if you get a file from the server without specifying its destination,
it goes to the client's current directory (in this case, /root).
Other commands you might run so that they are interpreted by the client system include !cd (to change directories) and !ls (to list files).
