Boot-Up Troubleshooting
---
Before you can begin troubleshooting a running Linux system itself, that system needs to boot up. For a Linux system to boot up, a series of things has to happen. 
A Linux system installed directly on a PC architecture computer goes through the following steps to boot up:

- Turning on the power
- Starting the hardware (from BIOS or UEFI firmware)
- Finding the location of the boot loader and starting it
- Choosing an operating system from the boot loader
- Starting the kernel and initial RAM disk for the selected operating system
- Starting the initialization process (init or systemd)
- Starting all of the services associated with the selected level of activity (runlevel or default target)

Understanding Startup Methods Starting with System V init scripts
---

The System V init facility consists of the init process (the first process to run after the kernel itself), 
an /etc/inittab file that directs all startup activities, and a set of shell scripts that starts each of the individual services.
The first Fedora releases, and up to RHEL 5, used the System V init process.
RHEL 6 contains a sort of hybrid of System V init, with the init process itself replaced by the Upstart init process.

In System V init, sets of services are assigned to what is referred to as runlevels. For example, the multi-user runlevel can start basic system services, network interfaces, and network services. 
Single-user mode just starts enough of the basic Linux system so that someone can log in from the system console without starting network interfaces or services.

After a System V init system is up and running, you can use commands such as reboot, shutdown, and init to change runlevels.
You can use commands such as service and chkconfig to start/stop individual services or enable/disable services, respectively.

The System V init scripts are set to run in a specific order, with each script having to complete before the next can start.
If a service fails, there is no provision for that service to restart automatically. 
In contrast, systemd was designed to address these and other System V init shortcomings.

Understanding Startup Methods Starting with systemd
---

- Targets Instead of runlevels, systemd focuses on targets. A target can start a set of services as well as create or start other types of units (such as directory mounts, sockets, swap areas, and timers).
- System V compatibility There are targets that align with System V runlevels, if you are used to dealing with runlevels.
  For example, graphical.target aligns with runlevel 5 while multi-user.target is essentially runlevel 3.
  However, there are many more targets than runlevels, giving you the opportunity to manage sets of units more finely.
  Likewise, systemd supports System V init scripts and commands, such as chkconfig and service for manipulating those services if System V init services happen to be installed.
- Dependency-based startup When the system starts up, any service in the default target (graphical.target for desktops and multi-user.target for most servers) that has had its dependencies met can start.
  This feature can speed up the boot process by ensuring that a single stalled service doesn't stall other services from starting if they don't need the stalled service.
- Resource usage With systemd, you can use cgroups to limit how much of your system's resources are consumed by a service.
  For example, you can limit the amount of memory, CPU, or other resources an entire service can consume,
  so a runaway process or a service that spins off an unreasonable number of child processes cannot consume more than the entire service is allowed.


When a systemd-enabled Linux system starts up, the first running process (PID 1) is the systemd daemon (instead of the init daemon). 
Later, the primary command for managing systemd services is the systemctl command. Managing systemd journal (log) messages is done with the journalctl command.
You also have the ability to use old-style System V init commands such as init, poweroff, reboot, runlevel, and shutdown to manage services.


Starting from the firmware (BIOS or UEFI)
---

On PC architectures, that firmware has traditionally been referred to as BIOS (Basic Input Output System). 
In recent years, a new type of firmware called UEFI (Unified Extensible Firmware Interface) has become available to replace BIOS on some computers.
The two are mutually exclusive.

UEFI was designed to allow a secure boot feature, which can be used to ensure that only operating systems whose components have been signed can be used during the boot process. 
UEFI can still be used with non-signed operating systems by disabling the secure boot feature.

The main job of BIOS and UEFI firmware is to initialize the hardware and then hand off control of the boot process to a boot loader. 
The boot loader then finds and starts the operating system. After an operating system is installed, 
you should typically just let the firmware do its work and not interrupt it.

Troubleshooting BIOS setup
---

here are some instances when you may want to go into Setup mode and change something in the BIOS:

- To see an overview of your hardware If your troubleshooting problem is hardware related, the BIOS setup is a great place to start examining your system. The Setup screen tells you the type of system, its BIOS version, its processors, its memory slots and types, whether it is 32-bit or 64-bit, which devices are in each slot, and many details about the types of devices attached to the system.
If you can't get an operating system booted at all, the BIOS Setup screen may be the only way to determine the system model, processor type, and other information you'll need to search for help or call for support.

- To disable/enable a device Most devices connected to your computer are enabled and made available for use by the operating system. To troubleshoot a problem, you may need to disable a device.
  For example, let's say that your computer has two network interface cards (NICs). You want to use the second NIC to install Linux over a network, but the installer keeps trying to use the first NIC to connect to the network. You can disable the first NIC so that the installer doesn't even see it when it tries to connect to the network. Or, you can keep the NIC visible to the computer but simply disable the NIC's ability to PXE boot.
  Maybe you have an audio card, and you want to disable the integrated audio on the motherboard. That can be done in the BIOS as well.
  Conversely, sometimes you want to enable a device that has been disabled. Perhaps you were given a computer that had a device disabled in the BIOS. From the operating system, for example, it may look like you don't have front USB ports or a CD drive. Looking at the BIOS tells you whether those devices are not available simply because they have been disabled in the BIOS.
- To change a device setting Sometimes, the default settings that come in your BIOS don't work for your situation. You might want to change the following settings in the BIOS:
  - NIC PXE boot settings Most modern NICs are capable of booting from servers found on the network. If you need to do that, and you find that the NIC doesn't come up as a bootable device on your Boot Order screen, you may have to enable that feature in the BIOS.
  - Virtualization settings If you want to run a Linux system as a virtual host, the computer's CPU must include Intel Virtual Technology or AMD Secure Virtual Machine (SVM) support. It is possible, however, that even if your CPU comes with this support, it may not be enabled in the BIOS. To enable it, go to the BIOS Setup screen and look for a Virtualization selection (possibly under the Performance category). Make sure that it is set to On.


 Troubleshooting boot order
 ---

Depending on the hardware attached to your computer, a typical boot order might boot a CD/DVD drive first, then the hard drive, then a USB device, and finally the network interface card.
The BIOS would go to each device, looking for a boot loader in the device's master boot record.
If the BIOS finds a boot loader, it starts it.
If no boot loader is located, the BIOS moves on to the next device until all are tried. If no boot loader is found, the computer fails to boot.

Troubleshooting the GRUB boot loader
---

The GRUB Legacy boot loader
---
Here are a few ways in which the boot loader might fail in RHEL 6 and some ways that you can overcome those failures:

- **Could not locate active partition** When a boot loader is installed on a storage medium, the partition is usually marked as bootable. If you see this message, it means that no bootable partition was found. If you feel sure that the boot loader is on the disk, try using the fdisk command (probably from rescue media) to make the partition bootable and try again. See the section “Partitioning Hard Disks” of Chapter 12, “Managing Disks and Filesystems,” for more information on the fdisk command.
- **Selected boot device not available**
- **Text-based GRUB prompt appears**

Starting the kernel
---

In addition to scrolling past on the screen, messages produced when the kernel boots are copied to the kernel ring buffer. As its name implies, the kernel ring buffer stores kernel messages in a buffer, throwing out older messages after that buffer is full. After the computer boots up completely, you can log into the system and enter the following command to capture these kernel messages in a file (then view them with the less command):
```
# dmesg > /tmp/kernel_msg.txt
# less /tmp/kernel_msg.txt
```

In Linux systems that support systemd, kernel messages are stored in the systemd journal. So, besides the dmesg command, you can also run journalctl to see kernel messages from boot time to the present. For example, here are kernel messages output from a RHEL 7 system:
```
# journalctl -k
-- Logs begin at Sat 2019-11-23 10:36:31 EST,
      end at Sun 2019-12-08 08:09:42 EST. --
Nov 23 10:36:31 rhel81 kernel: Linux version 4.18.0-147.0.3.el8_1.x86_64
    (mockbuild@x86-vm-09.build.eng.bos.redhat.com)
       (gcc version 8.3.1 20190507 (Red Hat 8.3.1-4)
         (GCC)) #1 SMP Mon Nov 11 12:58:36 UTC 2019
Nov 23 10:36:31 rhel81 kernel: Command line:
  BOOT_IMAGE=(hd0,msdos1)/vmlinuz-4.18.0-147.0.3.el8_1.x86_64
    root=/dev/mapper/rhel-root ro resume=/dev/mapper/rhel-swap
       rd.lvm.lv=rhel/root rd.lvm.lv=rhel/swap rhgb quiet
…
Nov 23 10:36:31 rhel81 kernel: Hypervisor detected: KVM
Nov 23 10:36:31 rhel81 kernel: kvm-clock: Using msrs 4b564d01 …
```

Troubleshooting runlevel processes
---
In Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6.x and earlier, when the system first comes up, services are started based on the default runlevel. There are seven different runlevels, from 0 to 6. 
The default runlevel is typically 3 (for a server) or 5 (for a desktop). Here are descriptions of the runlevels in Linux systems up to RHEL 6:

- 0: Shutdown runlevel. All processes are stopped, and the computer is powered down.
- 1: Single-user runlevel. Only those processes that are needed to boot the computer (including mounting all filesystems) and have the system available from the console are run. Networking and network services are not started. This runlevel bypasses normal authentication and boots up to a root user prompt (called sulogin). If you boot up to this mode, you can use it to become root user immediately in order to change a forgotten root password. (You could also use the word single instead of 1 to get to single-user runlevel. The difference between single and 1 is that single does not start scripts in the /etc/rc1.d directory.)
- 2: Multiuser runlevel. This runlevel is rarely used today. The original meaning of this runlevel has been lost. Early UNIX systems used this runlevel to start tty processes for systems where there were multiple dumb terminals connected to the system for people to use. This allowed many people to access a system simultaneously from character-based terminals (lots of people working from a shell with no graphical interface). Network interfaces were not started, usually because always-up network interfaces were not common. These days, runlevel 2 usually starts network interfaces, although not all network services are started.
- 3: Multiuser plus networking runlevel. This runlevel is typically used on Linux servers that do not boot up to a graphical interface but rather just a plain text prompt at the console. The network is started, as are all network services. A graphical desktop environment may or may not be installed (typically not) on machines that boot to runlevel 3, but the graphical environments must be started after boot time to be used.
- 4: Undefined. This runlevel tends to start the same services as runlevel 3. It can be used if you want to have different services available from runlevel 3 and runlevel 4. This runlevel is typically not used. Instead, runlevel 3 or runlevel 5 is used to boot to, with an administrator simply turning services on or off as required for the running system.
- 5: Multiuser, networking, plus graphical interface runlevel. This is the runlevel generally used with desktop Linux systems. It generally starts networking and all networked services; plus, it launches a graphical login prompt at the console. When the users log in, they see a graphical desktop environment.
- 6: Reboot runlevel. This is like runlevel 0 in that it brings down all services and stops all processes. However, runlevel 6 then starts the system back up again.

Runlevels are meant to set the level of activity on a Linux system. A default runlevel is set in the /etc/inittab file, but you can change the runlevel anytime you like using the init command. 
For example, as root, you might type init 0 to shut down, init 3 if you want to kill the graphical interface (from runlevel 5) but leave all other services up, or init 6 to reboot.


Normal default runlevels (in other words, the runlevel to which you boot) are 3 (for a server) and 5 (for a desktop). Often, servers don't have desktops installed, so they boot to runlevel 3 so that they don't incur the processing overhead or the added security risks for having a desktop running on their web servers or file servers.

You can go either up or down with runlevels. For example, an administrator doing maintenance on a system may boot to runlevel 1 and then type init 3 to boot up to the full services needed on a server. Someone debugging a desktop may boot to runlevel 5 and then go down to runlevel 3 to try to fix the desktop (such as installing a new driver or changing the screen resolution) before typing init 5 to return to the desktop.

The level of services at each runlevel is determined by the runlevel scripts that are set to start. There are rc directories for each runlevel: /etc/rc0.d/, /etc/rc1.d/, /etc/rc2.d/, /etc/rc3.d/, and so on. When an application has a startup script associated with it, that script is placed in the /etc/init.d/ directory and then symbolically linked to a file in each /etc/rc?.d/ directory.


Troubleshooting systemd initialization
---

When the systemd daemon (/usr/lib/systemd/systemd) is started after the kernel starts up, it sets in motion all of the other services that are set to start up. In particular, it keys off of the contents of the /etc/systemd/system/default.target file, as in this example:
```
# cat /etc/systemd/system/default.target
…
[Unit]
Description=Graphical Interface
Documentation=man:systemd.special(7)
Requires=multi-user.target
Wants=display-manager.service
Conflicts=rescue.service rescue.target
After=multi-user.target rescue.service rescue.target display-manager.service
AllowIsolate=yes
```

The default.target file is actually a symbolic link to a file in the /lib/systemd/system directory.
For a server, it may be linked to the multi-user.target file; for a desktop, it is linked to the graphical.target file (as is shown here).

Keep in mind that, unlike System V init, systemd can start, stop, and otherwise manage unit files that represent more than just services. It can manage devices, automounts, paths, sockets, and other things. After systemd has started everything, you can log into the system to investigate and troubleshoot any potential problems.

After you log in, running the systemctl command lets you see every unit file that systemd tried to start up. Here is an example:
```
# systemctl
UNIT                                       LOAD ACTIVE SUB
 DESCRIPTION
proc-sys-fs-binfmt_misc.automount          loaded active waiting
 Arbitrary Executable File Formats File System
sys-devices-pc…:00:1b.0-sound-card0.device loaded active plugged
 631xESB/632xESB High Definition Audio Control
sys-devices-pc…:00:1d.2-usb4-4\x2d2.device loaded active plugged
 DeskJet 5550
…
 
-.mount        loaded active mounted Root Mount
boot.mount     loaded active mounted /boot
…
autofs.service         loaded active running
      Automounts filesystems on demand
cups.service           loaded active running
      CUPS Scheduler
httpd.service          loaded failed failed
      The Apache HTTP Server
```
From the systemctl output, you can see whether any unit file failed. In this case, you can see that the httpd.service (your web server) failed to start. To investigate further, you can run journalctl -u for that service to see whether any error messages were reported:
```
# journalctl -u httpd.service
…
Dec 08 09:30:36 rhel81-bible systemd[1]: Starting The Apache HTTP Server…
Dec 08 09:30:36 rhel81-bible httpd[16208]: httpd: Syntax error
  on line 105 of /etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf:
  /etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf:105: <Directory> was not closed.
Dec 08 09:30:36 rhel81-bible systemd[1]: httpd.service: Main process exited,
  code=exited, status=1/FAILURE
Dec 08 09:30:36 rhel81-bible systemd[1]: httpd.service:
  Failed with result 'exit-code'.
Dec 08 09:30:36 rhel81-bible systemd[1]:
  Failed to start The Apache HTTP Server.
```

Analyzing the systemd boot process
---
To see exactly what happened during the boot process for a system using the systemd service, systemd provides the systemd-analyze tool. If you want to see if there are services that are stalling, or you want to look for a place to put in your own systemcd service, you can use this command to analyze the entire startup process. Here are some examples:
```
# systemd-analyze time
Startup finished in 1.775s (kernel) + 21.860s (initrd)
    + 1min 42.414s (userspace) = 2min 6.051s
graphical.target reached after 1min 42.121s in userspace
```

The time option lets you see how long each phase of the startup process took, from the start of the kernel to the end of the default target.

Troubleshooting Software Packages
---
```
If you use the apt-get command in Ubuntu to update your packages, keep in mind that there are different meanings to the update and upgrade options in Ubuntu with apt-get than with the dnf or yum command (Fedora and RHEL).

In Ubuntu, apt-get update causes the latest packaging metadata (package names, version numbers, and so on) to be downloaded to the local system. Running apt-get upgrade causes the system to upgrade any installed packages that have new versions available, based on the latest downloaded metadata.

In contrast, every time that you run a dnf or yum command in Fedora or RHEL, the latest metadata about new packages for the current release is downloaded. When you then run yum update, you get the latest packages available for the current release of Fedora or RHEL. To go to the next release, you must run dnf system-upgrade, as described earlier.
```
```
Using cron for Software Updates
The cron facility provides a means of running commands at predetermined times and intervals. You can set the exact minute, hour, day, or month that a command runs. You can configure a command to run every five minutes, every third hour, or at a particular time on Friday afternoon.

If you want to use cron to set up nightly software updates, you can do that as the root user by running the crontab -e command. That opens a file using your default editor (vi command by default) that you can configure as a crontab file. Here's an example of what the crontab file you create might look like:

    #  min  hour  day/month  month  day/week  command
       59   23    *          *      *         dnf -y update | mail root@localhost
A crontab file consists of five fields, designating day and time, and a sixth field, containing the command line to run. I added the comment line to indicate the fields. Here, the dnf -y update command is run, with its output mailed to the user root@localhost. The command is run at 59 minutes after hour 23 (11:59 p.m.). The asterisks (*) are required as placeholders, instructing cron to run the command on every day of the month, month, and day of the week.

When you create a cron entry, make sure that you either direct the output to a file or pipe the output to a command that can deal with the output. If you don't, any output is sent to the user that ran the crontab -e command (in this case, root).

In a crontab file, you can have a range of numbers or a list of numbers, or you can skip numbers. For example, 1, 5, or 17 in the first field causes the command to be run 1, 5, and 17 minutes after the hour. An */3 in the second field causes the command to run every three hours (midnight, 3 a.m., 6 a.m., and so on). A 1-3 in the fourth field tells cron to run the command in January, February, and March. Days of the week and months can be entered as numbers or words.

For more information on the format of a crontab file, type man 5 crontab. To read about the crontab command, type man 1 crontab.
```

Troubleshooting Networking
---
#### View network interfaces

To see the status of your network interfaces, use the ip command. The following output shows that the loopback interface (lo) is up (so you can run network commands on your local system), but eth0 (your first wired network card) is down (state DOWN). If the interface had been up, an inet line would show the IP address of the interface. Here, only the loopback interface has an inet address (127.0.0.1).
```
# ip addr show
1: lo: <LOOPBACK,UP,LOWER_UP> mtu 16436 qdisc noqueue state UNKNOWN
    link/loopback 00:00:00:00:00:00 brd 00:00:00:00:00:00
    inet 127.0.0.1/8 scope host lo
    inet6 ::1/128 scope host
       valid_lft forever preferred_lft forever
2: eth0: <NO-CARRIER,BROADCAST,MULTICAST,UP> mtu 1500 state DOWN qlen 1000
    link/ether f0:de:f1:28:46:d9 brd ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff
```
By default in RHEL 8 and Fedora, network interfaces are now named based on how they are connected to the physical hardware. For example, in RHEL 8, 
you might see a network interface of enp11s0. That would indicate that the NIC is a wired Ethernet card (en) on PCI board 11 (p11) and slot 0 (s0).
A wireless card would start with wl instead of en. The intention is to make the NIC names more predictable,
because when the system is rebooted, it is not guaranteed which interfaces would be named eth0, eth1, and so on by the operating system.


#### Check routes
```
ip route show
default via 192.168.122.1 dev ens3 proto dhcp metric 100 
192.168.122.0/24 dev ens3 proto kernel scope link src 192.168.122.194 metric 100
```
The default line shows that the default gateway is at address 192.168.122.1 and that the address can be reached over the ens3 card.
Because there is only the ens3 interface here and only a route to the 192.168.122.0 network is shown, 
all communication not addressed to a host on the 192.168.122.0/24 network is sent through the default gateway (192.168.122.1). 
The default gateway is more properly referred to as a router.

The default line shows that the default gateway is at address 192.168.122.1 and that the address can be reached over the ens3 card. 
Because there is only the ens3 interface here and only a route to the 192.168.122.0 network is shown, all communication not addressed to a host on the 192.168.122.0/24 network is sent through the default gateway (192.168.122.1). The default gateway is more properly referred to as a router.

To make sure that you can reach your router, try to ping it, as in this example:
```
# ping -c 2 192.168.122.1
PING 192.168.122.1 (192.168.122.1) 56(84) bytes of data.
64 bytes from 192.168.122.1: icmp_seq=1 ttl=64 time=0.757 ms
64 bytes from 192.168.122.1: icmp_seq=2 ttl=64 time=0.538 ms
 
--- 192.168.122.1 ping statistics ---
2 packets transmitted, 2 received, 0% packet loss, time 65ms
rtt min/avg/max/mdev = 0.538/0.647/0.757/0.112 ms
```

If you can reach a remote system but the connection is very slow, you can use the traceroute command to follow the route to the remote host. 
For example, this command shows each hop taken en route to http://www.google.com:
```
# traceroute www.google.com
```

#### Check hostname resolution

The DNS server your system uses can be entered manually or picked up automatically from a DHCP server when you start your network interfaces. In either case, the names and IP addresses of one or more DNS servers end up in your /etc/resolv.conf file. Here is an example of that file:
```   
search example.com
nameserver 192.168.0.254
nameserver 192.168.0.253
```


- Check if DNS server can be reached. Knowing the name server addresses, you can try to ping each name server's IP address to see if it is accessible. For example: ping -c 2 192.168.0.254. If the IP address can be reached, it could be that you were either assigned the wrong address for the DNS server or it is currently down.
- Check if DNS server is working. You specifically try to use each DNS server with the host or dig command. For example, either of these two commands can be used to see if the DNS server at 192.168.0.254 can resolve the hostname www.google.com into an IP address. Repeat this for each name server's IP address until you find which ones work:
```
     # host www.google.com 192.168.0.254
        Using domain server:
        Name: 192.168.0.254
        Address: 192.168.0.254#53
        Aliases:
        www.google.com has address 172.217.13.228
        www.google.com has IPv6 address 2607:f8b0:4004:809::2004
        # dig @192.168.0.254 www.google.com
        …
        ;; QUESTION SECTION:
        ;www.google.com.              IN  A
 
        ;; ANSWER SECTION:
        www.google.com.       67  IN  A   172.217.13.228
        …
```
- Correct your DNS servers. If you determine that you have the wrong IP addresses set for your DNS servers, changing them can be a bit tricky. Search /var/log/messages or the output of journalctl for your DNS servers’ IP addresses. If NetworkManager is used to start your networking and connect to a DHCP server, you should see name server lines with the IP addresses being assigned. If the addresses are wrong, you can override them.
  With NetworkManager enabled, you can't just add name server entries to the /etc/resolv.conf file because NetworkManager overwrites that file with its own name server entries. Instead, add a PEERDNS=no line to the ifcfg file for the network interface (for example, ifcfg-eth0 in the /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts directory). Then set DNS1=192.168.0.254 (or whatever is your DNS server's IP address). The new address is used the next time you restart your networking.\
  If you are using the network service, instead of NetworkManager, you can still use PEERDNS=no to prevent the DHCP server from overwriting your DNS addresses. However, in that case, you can edit the resolv.conf file directly to set your DNS server addresses.

  #### Check if the service is available to the client

  From a Linux client, you can check if the service you are looking for (in this case httpd) is available from the server. One way to do that is using the `nmap` command.

  The nmap command is a favorite tool for system administrators checking for various kinds of information on networks.
  However, it is a favorite cracker tool as well because it can scan servers, looking for potential vulnerabilities.
  So, it is fine to use nmap to scan your own systems to check for problems,
   but know that using nmap on another system is like checking the doors and windows on someone's house to see if you can get in. You look like an intruder.
```
  # nmap 192.168.0.119
Starting Nmap 6.40 ( http://nmap.org ) at 2019-12-08 13:28 EST
Nmap scan report for spike (192.168.0.119)
Host is up (0.0037s latency).
Not shown: 995 filtered ports
PORT    STATE  SERVICE
21/tcp  open   ftp
22/tcp  open   ssh
80/tcp  open   http
443/tcp open   https
631/tcp open   ipp
MAC Address: 00:1B:21:0A:E8:5E (Intel Corporate)
Nmap done: 1 IP address (1 host up) scanned in 4.77 seconds
```

#### Check the firewall on the server

From your server, you can use the iptables command to list the filter table rules that are in place. Here is an example:
```
# iptables -vnL
Chain INPUT (policy ACCEPT 0 packets, 0 bytes)
pkts bytes target prot opt in out source    destination
…
   0     0 ACCEPT tcp  --  *  *   0.0.0.0/0 0.0.0.0/0   state NEW tcp dpt:80
   0     0 ACCEPT tcp  --  *  *   0.0.0.0/0 0.0.0.0/0   state NEW tcp dpt:443
…
```

 If there aren't any, add those rules to the /etc/sysconfig/iptables file. Here are examples of what those rules might look like:
```
-A INPUT -m state --state NEW -m tcp -p tcp --dport 80 -j ACCEPT
-A INPUT -m state --state NEW -m tcp -p tcp --dport 443 -j ACCEPT
```
With the rules added to the file, clear out all of your firewall rules (systemctl stop iptables.service or service iptables stop) 
and then start them again (systemctl start iptables.service or service iptables start).


#### Check the service on the server

The netstat command is a great general-purpose tool for checking network services. 
The following command lists the names and process IDs (p) for all processes that are listening (l) for TCP (t) and UDP (u) services, 
along with the port number (n) on which they are listening. The command line filters out all lines except those associated with the httpd process:
```
# netstat -tupln | grep httpd
tcp    0  0 :::80        :::*         LISTEN      2567/httpd
tcp    0  0 :::443       :::*         LISTEN      2567/httpd
```


Troubleshooting Memory
---


#### Checking for memory problems
```
# top
top - 22:48:24 up  3:59,  2 users,  load average: 1.51, 1.37, 1.15
Tasks: 281 total,   2 running, 279 sleeping,   0 stopped,   0 zombie
Cpu(s): 16.6%us,  3.0%sy,  0.0%ni, 80.3%id,  0.0%wa,  0.0%hi,  0.2%si,  0.0%st
Mem:   3716196k total,  2684924k used,  1031272k free,   146172k buffers
Swap:  4194296k total,        0k used,  4194296k free,   784176k cached
  PID USER     PR  NI  VIRT  RES  SHR S %CPU %MEM   TIME+  COMMAND
 6679 cnegus   20  0  1665m 937m  32m S   7.0 25.8  1:07.95 firefox
 6794 cnegus   20  0   743m 181m  30m R  64.8  5.0  1:22.82 npviewer.bin
 3327 cnegus   20  0  1145m 116m  66m S   0.0  3.2  0:39.25 soffice.bin
 6939 cnegus   20  0   145m  71m  23m S   0.0  2.0  0:00.97 acroread
 2440 root     20  0   183m  37m  26m S   1.3  1.0  1:04.81 Xorg
 2795 cnegus   20  0  1056m  22m  14m S   0.0  0.6  0:01.55 nautilus
```
There are two lines (Mem and Swap) and four columns of information (VIRT, RES, SHR, and %MEM) relating to memory in the top output.
In this example, you can see that RAM is not exhausted from the Mem line (only 2684924k of 3716196k is used) and that nothing is being swapped to disk from the Swap line (0k used).
