# Implementing Linux Security with Cryptography
To understand cryptographic concepts and the various Linux tools, you should know a few cryptography terms:

- Plain text: Text that a human or machine can read and comprehend
- Ciphertext: Text that a human or machine cannot read and comprehend
- Encryption: The process of converting plain text into ciphertext using an algorithm
- Decryption: The process of converting cipher text into plain text using an algorithm
- Cipher: The algorithm used to encrypt plain text into ciphertext and decrypt ciphertext into plain text
- Block cipher: A cipher that breaks data into blocks before encrypting
- Stream cipher: A cipher that encrypts the data without breaking it up
- Key: A piece of data required by the cipher to encrypt or decrypt data successfully

#### Understanding hashing

Hashing is not encryption, but it is a form of cryptography. Remember from Chapter 22, “Understanding Basic Linux Security,” that hashing is a one-way mathematical process used to create ciphertext.
However, unlike encryption, after you create a hash, you cannot de-hash it back to its original plain text.

In order for a hashing algorithm to be used in computer security, it needs to be collision-free, which means that the hashing algorithm does not output the same hash for two totally different inputs.
Each input must have a unique hashed output. Thus, cryptographic hashing is a one-way mathematical process that is collision-free.

By default, cryptography is already in use on a Linux system. For example, the /etc/shadow file contains hashed passwords. Hashing is used on Linux systems for the following:

- Passwords (Chapter 22)
- Verifying files
- Digital signatures
- Virus signatures (Chapter 22)

A hash is also called a message digest, checksum, fingerprint, or signature. One Linux utility that produces message digests is the sha256sum utility.

To create your hash, run the sha256sum command on the ISO image after you download that image. The sha256sum hash results for the downloaded software file are shown in the code that follows:
```
$ sha256sum Fedora-Workstation-Live-x86_64-30-1.2.iso
a4e2c49368860887f1cc1166b0613232d4d5de6b46f29c9756bc7cfd5e13f39f
   Fedora-Workstation-Live-x86_64-30-1.2.iso
```
