# Understanding SELinux Benefits

SELinux is a security enhancement module deployed on top of Linux. It provides additional security measures, is included by default, and is set to be in enforcing mode in Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL) and Fedora.

SELinux provides improved security on the Linux system via role based access controls (RBACs) on subjects and objects (aka processes and resources). “Traditional” Linux security uses Discretionary Access Controls (DACs).

 With RBAC, a process only has access to resources that it is explicitly allowed to access, based on the assigned role. The way that SELinux implements RBAC is to assign an SELinux policy to a process. That policy restricts access as follows:
- Only letting the process access resources that carry explicit labels
- Making potentially insecure features, such as write access to a directory, available as Booleans, which can be turned on or off

SELinux is not a replacement for DAC. Instead, it is an additional security layer.
- DAC rules are still used when using SELinux.
- DAC rules are checked first, and if access is allowed, then SELinux policies are checked.
- If DAC rules deny access, SELinux policies are not reviewed.
```
SELinux is the default security enhancement of Red Hat distributions, whereas AppArmor is the default security enhancement for Ubuntu. You can still install SELinux on Ubuntu by using the command sudo apt-get install selinux and then reboot. 
However, as of this writing, the Ubuntu Wiki page for SELinux suggests that you do not use Ubuntu's SELinux package (https://wiki.ubuntu.com/SELinux). If you want to learn more about AppArmor, go to https://help.ubuntu.com/community/AppArmor.
```

# Understanding How SELinux Works


The example that follows includes ls -lZ and the same file, my_stuff, but instead of just the DAC controls, the -Z option displays the SELinux security RBAC controls too.
```
$ ls -lZ my_stuff
-rw-rw-r--. johndoe johndoe unconfined_u:object_r:user_home_t:s0 … my_stuff
```
The ls -Z example displays four items associated with the file that are specific to SELinux:

- user (unconfined_u)
- role (object_r)
- type (user_home_t)
- level (s0)

These four RBAC items (user, role, type, and level) are used in the SELinux access control to determine appropriate access levels. Together, the items are called the SELinux security context. A security context (ID badge) is sometimes called a security label.


These security context assignments are given to subjects (processes and users). Each security context has a specific name. The name given depends upon what object or subject it has been assigned: Files have a file context, users have a user context, and processes have a process context, also called a domain.

#### Implementing SELinux security models

The role-based access control model, type enforcement, Multi-Level Security, and Bell-LaPadula models are all interesting topics. SELinux implements these models through a combination of four primary SELinux pieces:

- Operational modes
- Security contexts
- Policy types
- Policy rule packages

#### Understanding SELinux operational modes
SELinux comes with three operational modes: disabled, permissive, and enforcing. Each of these modes offers different benefits for Linux system security.

